---
title: "The Montreal Museum of Fine Arts' Digital Toolbox"
subtitle: Brown bag meeting
dateStart: 2024-10-29
dateEnd: 2024-10-29
timeStart: 11:30am
timeEnd: 12:30pm
place: Ouvroir
link: https://calendar.google.com/calendar/event?action=TEMPLATE&tmeid=NGRhaHVsY3F2am9yY3BibnFqN3VtOGhuYXEgbGFib3V2cm9pckBt&tmsrc=labouvroir%40gmail.com
description: "Brown bag meeting at the Ouvroir for Digital Art History and Museology on Tuesday, October 29, 2024, from 11:30 AM to 12:30 PM, in room C-8132 of the Jean-Brillant Pavilion (Université de Montréal)."
participants: [Laura Delfino]
draft: false

---

Brown bag meeting organized by the Ouvroir for Digital Art History and Museology are a series of conversations. They provide an opportunity for guest researchers to explain how they employ digital approaches in art history and museology. During each session, our speakers will share their research and experiences in a 25-minute presentation, followed by a discussion and Q&A session.

## Event

This talk is an invitation to explore the Digital Toolbox of PRISME, the digital mediation innovation lab at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts (MMFA). This platform, designed specifically for museum professionals, offers a range of facilitation tools, resources, and inspiring examples for creating meaningful, human-centered digital mediation experiences.

PRISME, active from October 2018 to December 2023 through funding from Québec's Digital Cultural Plan, enabled museum professionals, technological creators, and researchers to collaborate across Québec by adopting human-centered design approaches. This method, inspired by design thinking, places people at the heart of projects, creating experiences that resonate with the aspirations of the public.

*PRISME is a project funded by the Ministry of Culture and Communications as part of the implementation of Measure 115 of Québec's Digital Cultural Plan.*

## Speaker

**Laura Delfino** is the head of Educational Programs – Research, Innovation, and Digital Mediation at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts. Since 2022, she has overseen PRISME's activities, acting as a catalyst for discussions and collaborations. PRISME brings together various stakeholders to tackle issues of digital mediation and co-create new tools and experiences for museums. In 2019, Laura Delfino began her PhD studies and joined the teams of the Canada Research Chair in Citizen Museology. Her dissertation project is titled *From Irenic to Agonistic Museums: Problematizing the Notion of Belonging*. A proponent of social museology, she has been collaborating with various Canadian and international institutions for over a decade. Some of the projects she contributed to have been featured in scientific publications, including *La Lettre de l’OCIM* (2019) and the journal *Muséologies*.

## Partners


## Meeting Location

Room C-8132, Jean-Brillant Pavilion (Université de Montréal), and on [Zoom](https://umontreal.zoom.us/j/82480661654?pwd=cUlzb09hZ3lkd2UvcmpPbTdmQkZBQT09)
