---
title: "Progrès dans l'accessibilité du patrimoine culturel par le son : Expériences de réalité augmentée sonore avec la technologie de conduction osseuse"
subtitle:
dateStart: 2024-01-31
dateEnd: 2024-01-31
timeStart: 11:00 am
timeEnd: 01:00 pm
place: Ouvroir
link: ''
description: 'The first Midi-Causerie features Andrea Gozzi, a postdoctoral researcher in research-creation (UdeM), who will discuss his work at the intersection of Digital Humanities, museology, and studies on perception and music.'
participants: [Andrea Gozzi]
draft: false
---

Join us on January 31, 2024, at Ouvroir from 11:30 am to 1:00 pm for the first Midi-Causerie, featuring Andrea Gozzi, a postdoctoral researcher in research-creation (UdeM) who will discuss his work and experimentations at the intersection of Digital Humanities, museology, and studies on perception and music.

## Presentation Summary

Sounds and soundscapes have a profound impact on our daily lives, shaping our activities and memories. Due to its evocative, ephemeral, and intangible nature, sound has the power to evoke the past and enrich the present. Auditory experiences can provide seamless access to cultural and artistic heritage through sound augmented reality (SAR) projects, using bone conduction headphones (BCH). BCH allows the harmonious merging of layers of real and virtual sound, enhancing the realism of virtual sound objects. This interdisciplinary research in digital humanities — combining cultural heritage, sound studies, archaeoacoustics, and museum studies — introduces the history and bone conduction devices to explore the latest SAR experiences with BCH. Use cases of completed projects for museums and theaters in Italy are presented, developed by Mezzo Forte, a company specializing in AR and VR. Examples include sound design and audio guides for Palazzo Vecchio and Museo degli Innocenti (Florence), Fondazione Primo Conti, Roman Theater, and archaeological area (Fiesole), Rocca Malatestiana (Verucchio); augmented and geolocated audio guides for the Parco delle Biancane of UNESCO (Monterotondo Marittimo); musical composition and audio guides for the historical waterways of Livorno; virtual acoustics for the Teatro del Maggio Musicale Fiorentino (Florence); and an interactive SAR theater piece, SOS Ghost, for the Ex ILVA area in Follonica.

## About Andrea Gozzi

Musician and musicologist. Postdoctoral researcher Mitacs at the University of Montreal – Faculty of Music; Ph.D. in digital humanities, music, and new technologies at SAGAS, University of Florence; graduate in music from the University of Paris 8 Vincennes-Saint-Denis. Member of the research center team Tempo Reale (Florence) and co-founder of Mezzo Forte, a company specializing in augmented reality sound. As a musician, he has collaborated with international artists, live and in the studio, participating in events such as LIVE 8 in Rome (2005). As a composer for the theater, he actively collaborates with the French Theatre of Toronto. He has published books and essays on the history of rock and musical biographies in Italy and Canada.

## Practical Information

**The event will be held in a hybrid format.**

- In-person at the University of Montreal, Lionel-Groulx pavilion, room C-8132. (3150 Jean-Brillant Street, Montreal H3T 1N8)
- Remotely on Zoom.

Presentation will be given in French.
