---
title: "Workshop on Art History Training: The Current State and Future of the Discipline"
dateStart: 2025-01-30 # date de début de l'événement - valeur nécessaire
dateEnd: 2025-01-30 # date de fin de l'événement - valeur nécessaire
timeStart: 04:00pm # heure de début de l'événement - valeur nécessaire
timeEnd: 06:00pm # heure de début de l'événement - valeur nécessaire
description: "" # description - valeur  nécessaire
author: Ouvroir # auteur.e - valeur nécessaire
place: Ouvroir
link: # lien pour s'inscrire - peut être vide
participants: [] # liste - la liste peut être vide mais il faut une liste
draft: false # true ou false
lang: en #lang en ou fr
tags: [] # liste - la liste peut être vide mais il faut une liste
---

# **Workshop on Art History Training: The Current State and Future of the Discipline**

During this two-session workshop, participants will discuss the past, present, and future of training programs in art history and museology, with a particular focus on how computer technologies and related technical skills could or should be integrated into disciplinary education.

## Discussion

The following questions will guide this meeting and structure the conversation:

- What is the current state of art history curricula? Are students being introduced to topics such as data mastery, computational methodologies, or digital information infrastructures in art history? If so, in which programs? Are there areas of study or skill sets we could address but are currently overlooking?
- Should art history students acquire technical skills, and if so, which ones and at what stage in their training?
- What are the connections between discussions on decolonizing art history and those related to computational approaches or the influence of technology on research?
- How can we design curricula to address the current and future challenges of the discipline?

The focus will be on graduate student training, but undergraduate students are welcome to contribute to the conversation.

### Practical Information

**Dates of the two sessions:** January 30 and March 27, 2025
 **Time:** 4:00 PM to 6:00 PM
 **Location:** Université de Montréal, Lionel-Groulx Pavilion, Room C-8132
