---
title: "La documentation de l'exposition avec le Web Sémantique"
description: "Notes Journée d'étude 17 décembre 2024"
author: ouvroir
date: 2024-12-17
draft: false
tags:
    - expositions
  - notes
  - web sémantique
  - CIDOC
  - Display

---

28 personnes - Anais Guillem a eu un empechement

8:30 AM – 8:45 AM: Welcome and introduction to the event and the Ouvroir lab (15 min)

8:45 AM – 10:00 AM: Presentations (15 min each) in this order :

    Display Ontology (presented by our team)
    Nuria Rodríguez-Ortega
    Anaïs Guillem
    Nicola Carboni
    George Bruseker

10:00 AM – 10:15 AM: Break

## 10:15 AM – 12:30 PM: Round Table

Nicola : don't constrain display with cidoc crm. 
crm plus a problem than a solution. making another a extension is a solution if nobody sees it? 
Double instantitiation ? 

Nuria : trying to put onto in crm more difficult than to developp a new one. Need hooks for interoperability. Using abstract concept to have hooks. 

George : build new ontologies is important if their is none other ones. Data can be represented in many exhibitions. 

Zoë : we need to describe exhibitions
I have an exhibition, could I represent it in all the models. 

### Topological Questions

Nuria : specific terms for intellectual decision of the display. Building standardize vocab with skos.
Display class recording images. -- so not displaying, no topological. 

Nicola : topo - applying it on other subject than exhibition. Like icono. 3D coordinate. 

George : Gerent les temporalités des objets -- moi je sus derangée par les manifestations de fbroo -- 
Social and concepts levels are interesting to document. 

Anais work is using crm and other needs. 

### Points of Entry into CIDOC-CRM

Nicola : don't think we should do a mega-ontology. 
Prefers lighter models that can be contact. 

Nuria est daccord. --Pourtant son ontologie est enorme. --

Stephen : having common language is the best. Bring together different institutions. 

Georges : what about the SRDM? What about linked art? There was a nice project presented by FORTH on CIDOC datasets at least. 
http://83.212.101.193:4200/CIDOC-CRM_Portal/datasets/chart
Focussed forums that know the data are a good idea for keeping things matched to reality
https://docs.swissartresearch.net/ An article on it will get out soon :-D

Nuria : pas utilisation de crm aaa. Use crm to make it more interoperability but not useful. 

Georges : thinks their working on paralale grounds. Works also on another ontology on thoughts and frbr. That could go in the same direction. 
bend things in 

### Modeling Acts of Interpretation

### Semantic Representation of Exhibition Views

### Interoperability Challenges

### Role of Foundational Ontologies

ECD : should we fit to dolce? Should we align to a more foundational ontology. 

Georges : usefull to bring all approchaes together. 
la presentation de Nicola montrant la catagerorisation disponible partout. Ou devons nous faire des joints. 

Nicola : ne conseille pas d'utiliser dolce ou d'autres grosses ontology. Try to map data with Crm. 

Nuria : try to find interconexion within our different ontologies may be the best for all of us. make maping and connect our classes. 

David : linking ontologies : dual expression? multipoint expression? do it as the instance? 


Georges : create ontology and map it to another ontology, addotional maping to crm, create another bag of data. 
Some facilities in ontome tool, you can do equivalence statments. 

Nicola : make a table to map each ontology as a first step before using the ontome tool. 

### How to Collaborate Together

Would it be possible to test all our ontology on an exhibition? 

Nicola : On pourrait faire plusieurs exposition des differents data set. Have a page and compare. 


Comment gerent-ils les manques de documents? 


Nathalie thibault MNBAQ 
For Quebec and Canada. We have data about 3000 exhibitions...  I will  like to do an exploration/ project with this data. Sorry my english if not good.

Cindy veilleux : et les expos du MAC. 

Georges : anthropocentric perception is a important problematic we should take into count. 

### TO DO 

SHARE PRESENTATION 

proposer a anais un rdv pour rcc8. 

### Refs


https://zellij.pythonanywhere.com/

https://docs.ogc.org/is/22-047r1/22-047r1.html#_6f67539d-8b79-4a2b-b7b9-9b4a54e710d0